starting at 37min:25seconds

Muratori:
in this discussion that I'm not sure like you could talk about any of them for quite some time. So I think the
biggest thing I would point out is just that I think that when you're talking about
what you should learn in a college setting or more specifically what you should learn in any kind of educational
setting that is supposed to be uh more serious and less immediate. So,
for example, if I just want to learn Python, I mean, I don't know about you guys, maybe this is atypical, but I
don't think it is. Like, I'd never programmed Python before and I wanted to do a little bit of that for uh some
stuff I was doing on the Substack. It it it took like five minutes. Like, it like the amount of time it takes to learn for
me to learn to program Python was zero time. Right. Right. So the idea that like we need to
think very hard about what language you're learning uh to me seems just kind of ridiculous because if you're a if
you're a decent programmer then if someone asks you to program in a new language it's like I have never found
that to be a relevant question. It it just isn't. And maybe there are certain idiomatic things that I'm going to have
to like go read about because they wouldn't occur to me because I haven't been programming this language for 30 years or whatever it is. So like maybe I
will want to go like uh to a good reference of some people who you know that I would respect and say okay so
what are some idiomatic things that you tend to do in Python? Uh like all right I I see thank you and that's it. So to
me when we're talking about what is what is supposed to be there for even a
practical education not even the theoretical part it's what are the things that remain true
meaning if I learned them 30 years ago I didn't relearn them today. There is a
very big I think misconception promulgated by this C is not a low-level
language statement which I think is false and not interesting but that's
kind of irrelevant to the argument that somehow
the things that you would learn in a course that was about low-level programming
do not do not remain true because hardware has changed.
And that is just completely false. Like it's literally completely false. The exact same things you had to consider in
1968 and 1972 and 1977 and 1987 and 2012 and
2026 are exactly the same. The only difference is the diagram you are
reading about how these things are interconnected on the particular thing you have will be slightly different.
That's the difference right but name a thing whatever you want sim caches loop
caching virtual memory whatever it is it was there it was there since like at least 1970 but usually a little earlier
than that. And so if you went and learned about how computers work,
meaning you were like, "Here is a survey of how they work, generally speaking, this is what the architectures look
like. Here's the different kinds of components we have." That literally has changed almost not at all, you know, in
like 50 or 60 years. The the thing that changed the most is really like that everyone has the best of everything now
in their desktop chip. like all the things that you would have been like, "Oh, I had to have a CDC 6000 or a system, you know, 36091
to get those things like a loop cache, and now they're just on my PC by default
that I have in my home or my smartphone or whatever, right? That's the big difference, but that's really it.
They're all the same concepts." And so, uh, the reason that I think just
Extending down
to tie it back to Lori, uh, Lori Wyard's like original thing she said, the thing
she said is the important thing. It's that if you teach a course in something like C, I would say Rust is probably
equivalent here, although I'm not really a Rust programmer, but you know, it's basic, you know, you pick a language
like one of those languages. The important part is that it's very easy for someone to say, "And here's how we
would access this part of the CPU. Here's how we would do a thing that was cache aware. Here's how we would
multi-thread this. Here's how we would do an atomic, right? Because you're not forced to use some highlevel [snorts]
like co-outine implementation thing. That's the only way you do that in a
language, right? In some higher level language, that's that's great. in C. Yeah, the vanilla language C doesn't
have these things in it, but that's not the point. The point is that if you already kind of know roughly how to
learn something like C or Rust, you can then just right there without teaching the student anything new go now we are
going to go use this crazy instruction on your CPU by using an intrinsic to go
do this thing that looks at a SIMD vector and takes the mask register and packs the ones that are zeros into like
and you can understand it with knowing nothing more than just the C you already learned and the little bit that they're
trying to teach you now. And so at least what I got out of her statement and I thought she said it pretty clearly, she
even used the word like extending down to memory management or things like that. The thing about C is it's very
easy to extend down to whatever I need to teach you. It's not that the language itself has baked in the concept of
vector processing, but I don't want it to because if it did, I couldn't teach you it as easily, right? because you
don't have to learn how it actually works if the language is autovectorizing. If I teach you how to
write shaders, you will never know about how things like vectorzation work
because it's already baked into the threading model. The we're the like simt uh model of programming, right? So to me
like I think she was absolutely correct. I think the perspective that she placed it in was absolutely correct. And I
think that's the critical piece that has to be understood, right? And if you do learn those things, I think they're
useful for decades. Whereas, if you just learn how to program Python and the libraries that come with Python now, I I
honestly don't think 30 years from now anyone's going to care what those things were.
That was one thing I really like. So, I I technically have uh like more of a computer engineer. It's electrical and
computer engineering degree is like I didn't go I have a CS minor. And it was fun because we just learned a bunch of
stuff like about computers and like physically how they worked. And it was always very helpful to me because I I
was like, "Oh, you can look at the code and be like, well, that's going to be slow." Yeah. Cuz there's no way to make the computer
do that in any way that's not slow. You can just look at it and be like, "That's not going to be good." Which has served
me well for a long time, which I I like. And it didn't matter what language we
did it in. Mhm. Honestly, that was a loadbearing description you just gave right there. [laughter]
Genuinely, that was wellformed. Yeah, it was wellformed. In my honest
opinion, that was good. Yeah. And and so and it also means that you can do it in other languages, right? It doesn't have to be C. It just has to
be a language with that easy downward extension, which is it's it's very cumbersome to do that in Python. Even in
Java, it's cumbersome to do it. It doesn't mean can't, right? It's not trying to, you know, people get hung up
on can you or can't you do this thing in a language. It's just, it's just how simple is it to just extend downwards
into something I'm trying to teach you, right? And we could just teach it all in assembly language,
but I think at this point that just being able to read assembly languages enough. I don't know that we need to spend time to teach people to really
write significantly sized programs in assembly language. So learning C and how to read the ASOM that comes out of it
seems like a very or or like I said or Rust or something like that that's has this capability I think is a good idea
and I think Lori was correct. Well that was my next topic was what
makes C better and Casey I believe that you absolutely nailed that one. So that one's done. And so the real question is,
is Python a mistake or should that be is is Python itself the mistake or is it
the fact that there is not a heavy emphasis on C? And I think you've kind of also answered that which is that it's
the exact same thing as like a I mean it's kind of like a boot camp in some sense. You go to learn React. It's like
it's not a very extensible skill unless if you go and you practice it a whole bunch. So you're not learning like how to make a great UI. you're learning how
to use React to make a UI or cobalt might be a the historical analogy. It's like it's not a bad idea
to learn it at the time. It's just probably not that relevant 30 years from now, right? But but it
doesn't mean you shouldn't maybe start like like I think to T's point, start with it because it's like, hey, this is
what people are using today. You'll see a lot of it. It's easy for you to get
some stuff up on the screen that you'll be excited about, right? That all makes sense to me. So, I don't think Python is
Is Python a mistake?
a mistake. It's the lack of of some other thing that's the mistake if it's happening, which I don't know, by the
way, because I'm I don't know like like uh like Lori was talking about this move away from it. I don't know anything about that. So, I'm not saying that's
happening. I'm just saying assuming that is happening. I agree with her that that's a problem. I will say about the Cobalt thing
though, uh the use of cobalt cripples the mind. It's [laughter] teaching should therefore be uh regarded as a
criminal offense. Okay. Edgar Dystra, QED. So, just in case you're wondering, you can't do that one.
I think you could find that from Dystra about just about anything you wanted. [laughter] Everything is just actually crippling
the mind. Yes. He also said APPL is for people who want to go play play around.
APL is a mistake carried through to perfection. Yeah. Right. Yeah. I think so. He did like I mean
like I said the first CS class I took was Python and that's like before I took
that class I literally thought learning programming languages was like learning
Spanish or like learning a foreign language like the way everybody talked about it like in my life right because I
like nobody in my life is technical. My dad's an accountant and I always told him dad I like math but I'm not going to
do your math when I grow up. That's boring. Um right? And so, like, I
literally thought programming languages were cool. I have to go memorize like a bunch of random grammar things and like
there's like a million new vocab words and there's like 35,000 exceptions to everything and you can't do well on the
test unless you study extensively vocab and I didn't want to do that. I hated that. Um, so when but I had to take a CS
class as part of my like liberal arts thing because I was doing mechanical engineering. So, one of our like gen ed
classes we had to take was CS1 and I took Python. I was like, "Holy cow, programming is just like logic and like
pattern recognition and like trying to communicate with the computer. This is so much fun." And then from that class,
the next class we took was data structures and it was in C or C++. I think it was in like C++, but we pretty
much only used C features, you know what I mean? Like that kind of thing. And that was for me, I thought that was a
really effective way of getting people into a track for CS where you can see things like appear on the screen
quickly. You can interact with stuff. You can like, you know, draw a turtle that moves around on the screen and like
connects dots. You're like, I just told it to turn left and turn left. That's so cool. Like I think JavaScript is fine
for some of this. Whoa, whoa, whoa. Tee, a lot of people are thinking you're talking about an actual turtle now. You're going to have to logo pill them.
It's the Sorry. It's just literally a dot. It's a turtle's library in Python. So it's it's not as exciting as you
might think. It's just it's it's it's just dots. Logo pilled. Yeah. Sorry.
Went over my head. Yeah. Well, trash. That's because you're obviously not a real engineer. You don't know Python turtle library. So
What about C++ ?
[laughter] true. So, you know what? I did C++ in college and it almost made me quit coding. I hated it.
Was it at the very beginning or in the middle? Trash. I think it was like a 300 course. I did
VB before that. I did VB and then we went to dang C++ and I was like yo what are these
till days doing here that [laughter] was weird I do think like like the the the part
where maybe like I I wouldn't like I'm not sure about what the in the original context of the discussion
this the plus+ part of C++ is a problem and so like you know the the I think if
you were teaching people C++ the like the actual C++ the way that it is now
intended to be programmed. I do think that would be a similarly transient thing to teach people much like Python.
Like not something anyone will care about in 30 years. I know everyone's going to hate me for saying that, but like so you know that I I don't know
about that part. And maybe maybe Lori Wired was actually implying that teaching C++ the plus+ part was
important. I don't know. I would part ways there, but you don't that doesn't seem like her her like her
it wasn't the important part of what she the point she was making though I didn't think anyway. I think too to your point
Casey like as much as especially like you know let's say before maybe senior
year like my senior year we did a lot of like very pragmatic stuff where we like built projects together and like had to
figure out how to collaborate like so we ended up using git and figuring this out and a bunch of other stuff which was very helpful before going into the
workplace like let's say years one through three or something spending a bunch of time teaching you all about the
tildies where they go in C++ ++ will make programming not fun. It will not be fun for people and I think it is
actively like not helpful. You don't get [laughter] a reusable skill on the other side and you hate it. At least if you're
going to teach them a not reusable skill, make them like excited about something in programming like cool here's how to make a website and it
wasn't fun but at least you can like submit a form when you're done or something. I don't know.
Perfect Student
Um, so I I do have to admit something. Uh, which is that see at MSU, Montana
State University, not Michigan. Okay. Yeah. Uh, well, I don't like Michigan State either, so that's fine.
I know. I spit on that. I spitting I spit on that thing. You [laughter] know how many like CEOs of
HTMX right now are hanging on every word you're about to say? Oh, yes, they will.
Montana. I have been to his office. I actually know where it's at. I know I know all about the EPS representing the
engineering physical science building in which also has the computer science
laboratory in all right anyways I digressed a little bit but uh during my time when I started in 2005 Java was the
thing they taught and I man I hate to admit this I was a stellar student uh
the programming language concepts I had such a high grade they had to throw up mine and then curved to the next one I
got like 170% multiple times on on many tests. Okay. I was very very good at it. Wait, wait, wait, wait. 170%. Oh, after
the curve after the after being thrown off and the new curve shifting me up so far.
So, I was I was very very good at these things. Uh computer uh engineering to actually going through and and doing
like addition from a CPU's perspective [laughter] on integers by hand. I didn't hear what Trash said. Um
I'm just kidding. I said what happened. Oh, what happened? [laughter] I'm about to tell you that's the that's what this
is me getting to the shameful part trash. Okay, let me tell the story in a way that is you know because you have to
tell a story where people like oh he's just humble bragging and then I turn it around back on that. Now here's the thing bragging. [laughter]
Yes. I only had one class on C and it was kind of like a brief one where it's
like hey here's how to do a linked list in C. Here's how to do a few things and it wasn't really like that good. It was more like on the language of C. It was a
100 level class like just like how to dip your toes into C. And the thing is is that after I graduated college,
I could talk about heap and stack memory and all these things, but it didn't dawn on me until like a couple years after
college that when I was programming C that I was writing either to the stack or to the heap because I never actually
learned those things. So even though I aced every single thing, could do addition of a register by hand, I could
multiplication. I used to know all that stuff, all the barrel fun stuff, I could do all the things, but I actually had no
tying it together to the point where I just I did not understand it because they never taught
C. I only knew Java. And I do think that that was a great disservice that I wasn't pushed further into that category
where you take the theoretics like actually drawing the squares and then doing these squares in language in a
very practical kind of sense. And like I really do I really do feel like I I greatly missed out on that because all
practical assignments like doing AVL trees and everything were all done in Java. All my stuff was done in Java
except for networking which was done in C. But again, you're just playing with like you know net.h H you're not
actually you're not actually doing anything other than crafting UDP packets. So it's it's not quite the same thing. And so I do feel like I was
certainly robbed and it it uh I actually still look back at that as like what a waste that was. I was learning so many
things that I didn't understand how good they were, but I could pass exams. Like I could 100% all of them, but I
literally learned nothing because I didn't have that like the t the real tie into everything. And so I look back at
that as like a huge failure. And so I I do actually agree that I wish more things were in a sense reaching down as
you say like that makes perfect sense replaying it against my past. I could leak code. Yeah. Yeah. I could leak code like a
boss. Like I was that classic person that could come out and balance a tree but have no idea about anything else.
Well and I think that gets to like Lor's like extending downward thing which is the crucial part, right? It's like you
What should you be learning?
did learn some C but you can't like it they can't just say oh here's the C language. Okay now you know everything.
Like no, it's like the C language is just what what really we're saying is it's a way it's a framework that makes
it easier to teach these concepts that you actually need to know. And again, it's not you can't teach
another languages. Like one of the things I did on my Substack, right, is I'm like, hey, here's this Python program. It's extremely slow to add the
add numbers together and we can show why. Well, okay, we could we could use S Python to compile that Python into C.
You could go reach for Pi Pi or something, but you like those are all these steps that now you have to do
instead of just no, we can literally just write in this language without changing anything we're doing. We can
just show exactly how to do the thing from here. It's a very short step, right? And so it's really just about
it's a very it's just very convenient. It happens to hit a nice sweet spot. It's why it's been such an enduring language. there's so many things written
in it. So it's easy to go look at the examples of people doing things like operating systems in it because that's what they write operating systems in
blah blah blah blah right and so you know those languages and the C lineage languages like now successor
languages like Rust that are trying to be you know C and then some new things without breaking the cess of them right
um those are they're just easier to do this education I think I think that's
just the bottom line and when you if you made me teach the same thing in Java it's just going to be
harder for me to do that, right? Uh it's not that I couldn't, it's that it becomes just a lot harder to to uh
uh to do it because it's the wrong base. It's the wrong base layer. And you know, that's I don't know how to how else to
underscore that point. And I think that's what it might be really hard to do it at all. Like I'm not I you know, at least when I was in my 1.6 days, I don't know if you
can really disamiguate the stack in the heap. Yeah. Like in you knew up an object. I'm not sure if you really understand what's going on
there. Yeah. in like Java, I don't know how hard it would be to try to teach someone about like let's let's change the memory
layout of these things, right? Uh you know, and you know, can I disable the garbage collector in some Javas, you
know, can I go in there and and monkey with that stuff? I don't know. Uh but, you know, that would be the kinds of
things that I start to have to think about if I'm going to go, you know, use something like Python or Java, like how am I going to teach those things?
whereas in C it's just like it it's just made um you know the people say like it doesn't matter anymore because we're not
programming a PDP11 you know a obviously don't know anything about a PDP11 like they've probably never even read the
manual um it it had virtual memory so I don't know what they're say they like a
linear address space like no it wasn't right like it has a it has an address it it has a a t page table uh a address
translation table anyway so like there's weird weird stuff like that that people think But it's like, no, it really is.
And even if I want to teach you down to the micro op level, it's very easy to do that in C. And and it's not that easy to
do it another language for a variety of reasons. Uh and so languages like C um
help. It also just kind of seems like what you know, if our goal, even if the
goal isn't to get people a job from college or whatever, right? It's just like we want to teach them. Why would we make it harder than it needs to be? Like
if it's like cool our goal at the end of this semester is that you understand the
difference between stack and the heap and how it is managed in real programs like how it gets used. Cool. That's one
of our syllabus goals. Then why are we picking a way that makes that harder to show than it has? Like it just seems
that doesn't even make sense. You should just pick the one that's the best and like with the least number of hops and
the least extra things that you need to do so you can focus on them actually learning like the primary task, right?
Like if we're like, "Cool, this this semester is about memory management." Then let's like teach them that. Let's
not spend a bunch of time showing them like here's sealed classes in Java and why your homework didn't compile because
we put this extra keyword here to make sure you couldn't do this and cheat and get the wrong, you know, like awesome.
We didn't have to do we didn't have to do that, right? That's just like wasted time and effort. Well, and I I I guess I
Heap or Stack
mean just to uh to try to address people's concerns who complain about this. I I mean like one of the things
that I saw mentioned while people were complaining about the Lori Wired uh uh
inter interview I don't know what that thing was the pres presentation um was
like oh but there's no difference between the stack and the heap right which is which is true in the sense of
like they are stored in RAM right and so so I I agree with the statement that if
you're if you're asking me about like does some is something taking up more
space on the heap or the stack or something like that? Like I mean, you know, it there there's there's ways in
which that makes sense to say and I might say it sometimes if someone asked me a question about like that where that
was the correct answer. But it to say that there's no difference between the
stack and the heap in terms of educating you about what's going on is ridiculous because literally there are a number of
things in hardware that are about the stack. And it's not that they're storing
it in some magic thing that's not RAM, right? Or something like this. Uh it's
not that we're saying that. it's that there really are a bunch of things that are processor specific that have to do
with dealing with the stack. And so you do need to understand that difference. So you need to be able to understand
like what a push and a pop are like that's a thing that is specific to like what what is the stack pointer? That's a
thing that's like in hardware. What is the return address stack that's in hardware not stored in RAM by the way?
It's in a special thing inside the core, right? And so there's a number of things like that. And if you just fundamentally
have no way of understanding what those two things are, that would be really bad. And furthermore, it would be really
nice if when you write something in your language, whatever the teaching language is, that it's very direct. So if I have
int x and I know that the int is four bytes, and that's going to translate into a push for or something like this,
right? That's helpful, right? these these are help these are helpful things because there's a very short uh uh path
to me showing you what happens versus a very complicated like very high level language where the it's like I got to
trace you through 30 steps to show you how it got to the thing right and so again I just I think people are using
they're using irrelevant differences to argue that there's no value but there
but there is value like the fact that it's stored in RAM it's Uh,
it's not easy. Uh, by the way, the stack is stored in the balls. Okay. It's not stored in RAM. That's ridiculous. Yeah. Yeah. It's in the It's a secundi
stack. [clears throat] Classic stack. Yeah. TJ's not happy.
I was really trying to find a way to make a joke about how nobody goes to Stack Overflow anymore. And I was more
disappointed in myself in the inability to connect those two things together. Like, what? We don't need this stack
anymore. We have chat GPT. but it just didn't connect. So, I was more
disappointed with myself than than you two. Yeah. [laughter] Okay.
Yeah. Well, I feel like we've kind of touched all things, but Trash, I I kind of want to get your last last thoughts here as
Outro
we close this bad boy down. Can you uh give us your last thoughts, and I want you to close down the episode? [clears throat] My last thoughts is,
[sighs] how should I say this? I think these arguments are very tiring
and meaningless in most cases. Um I very much don't enjoy reading them at all. Uh
I do think it's helpful that we are bringing it to light. I do think there is some importance of you know telling
people what they what they should and shouldn't learn. I think ultimately it's going to depend on the person. So even
if you were to teach someone C, it's going to be up to them if they want to take it even deeper. I don't think it's going to be up to the school to kind of
push them to want to learn these things. Um, but in my humble opinion, I think if you
want to make it in this day and age of AI, you should really try a lot harder than you're trying now because it's
going to be even harder to uh stand out amongst the rest. Um, so for those that
are unemployed watching this, I think uh yeah, keep up the good fight and try
super duper hard because I I can't imagine what it's like to be in your
shoes right now. And with the age of AI, I know it's pretty terrifying. And I know myself what I'm doing is I'm making
sure that I'm still studying because, you know, one day I won't have the job I have now. And Lord knows what I need to
know when I have to go back in interviewing pool. I think it's going to be a completely different ballgame. So, I'm actually going down the hole of just
like understanding everything at a low level because I think that's the only way I'm going to stand out to be honest. Um, if you want me to code something, I
mean, I just literally type into a text box and it will pop out. So, yeah, those
are my those are my thoughts. Kind of depressing, but that's kind of just how I've been feeling lately. Um, I think AI
is honestly kind of depressing me if I'm being quite honest. And I think the only way I can uh take those emotions back is
to actually challenge myself outside of like the workspace and using AI and just
trying to build things for me. Um so
that was kind of sad, huh? Yeah. No, dude. That was good. [laughter] This was an emotional ending. That was an emotional ending to the the thing.
Trash, I think we should unpack this a little bit more later, too, cuz I'm interested to hear more of what you're thinking.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, for sure. Mhm. We can. We can. I know many other people feel the same
way. So Mhm. Yep. Well, let's [laughter] Would you like to
also close it out though? Trash. Thank you for watching the standup with the prime gym. I am Trash featuring
legendary programmer case and Tee. Right back [applause] at you, baby.
Thanks. Hey, well, I put Doom inside of a Neoim guy today. Okay, trash. [laughter] I saw
Can we stop? Can we Can we get the G out of Neo Vim Gooey? It just looks like text still. It just looks like
Casey, did you see? I don't think I don't think you realize. Did you see me put a circle? I put a
circle in, but it's just like you're just putting some a somebody else drawing graphics on
top of your text. It's just wait,
man. delusions of grandeur with the Neoim people. What can I do to convince you it's a
real GU? I don't know. Have like a lot of images in the the graphs happening like next to
the code or something like give me something I can sink my teeth into. T TJ the thing that I told you to put into
Neo. Yeah, that's what he wants to see. Yeah. The thing that you told me to put in Neoim. I wasn't listening probably. What
did you tell me to put? Yes, you were. We laughed about it this morning. I'm very offended that you've already forgot. If you're not spending a
million dollars in tokens, I don't think you're get Well, to impress me, Casey, I will. We're going to spend a million dollars in tokens and
get me a Neovim guy that actually looks G instead of T in the front of UI. Got it.
That's my That's my assignment. This I'll come back with something next week and I'll present it. All right.
Thank you everybody. Bye. Bye. Bye. Boot [singing] up today.
Five [music] errors [singing] on my screen. Terminal coffee
and living the dream.
